[Music]
jealousy is one of the most powerful
directional signals on the planet
because you're only jealous of people
that are doing things or have things
that you actually want it's impossible
to be fake jealous whatever you're
jealous of is hitting something deeply
personal [__] pay attention to it
instead of stewing in it go oh
flip it
how could i take those things that i'm
really now really inspired by
and take action and go get them in my
life
because the thing about jealousy is it's
just your inspiration that's blocked
robbins welcome back to the show oh
thank you tom it's been four years
that's hard to believe i'm super excited
to have you back in this chair to talk
about your new book the high five habit
you have a really freaky way of taking a
concept that is deceptively simple and
stupid i i won't say stupid but
it could be stupid in lesser hands how
about that okay and
i really enjoyed the book
the part of the book that jumped out and
really grabbed me there were two one
almost made me cry which we'll talk
about later because i am very surprised
that i liked that particular part i
thought i'm gonna hate the punchline of
the story
but is the dallas uber driver oh
so as somebody who has gotten into
countless ubers and some small
percentage of them know who i am and
then of course they start asking
questions
talk to me about chasing your dreams and
this quote that you have that an aha
moment does not necessarily lead to an
aha life
um
yeah the uber driver in dallas that's in
this book um
i get choked up when i think about him
uh an aha moment i choked up
i get choked up
because
what happens for me every single day
is and you hear from people every single
day
you've got millions and millions of
people that
are inspired by empowered by impacted by
your content
there are people out there that
use your work as a lifeline
and it is humbling
and what i am
really present to
in the work that i'm putting out in the
stuff that i'm sharing whether it's my
failures or the things that i'm using
that are helping me and my own struggles
is just how much people are holding
themselves back
and how
much pain people feel
because most folks know
what they dream about
and what they want
and yet
they're spending all of their time and
energy arguing against
what they want
and so you can have all these epiphanies
i hope that when somebody listens to our
conversation and watches this that they
have a massive aha moment but it's not
going to mean [__] [__]
if you don't take action and do
something about it
the aha moment is the door that opens
but your new life does not begin unless
you [__] step through the door
and most people and that's what was
so kind of
you know the simple idea of high-fiving
yourself of encouraging yourself of
supporting yourself most people when you
have an aha moment and the door to your
new life opens up
instead of going i got this let's go and
high-fiving yourself to step forward
most of us go
i don't know if i'm worth that i don't
know if right now is the right time to
do this i don't think i'm good enough
i've failed so many times i can't go
through that door
and that's the problem i want to attack
right now
that there is somewhere in your life
that you know what you want
you can feel it pulling you and you are
actively arguing against it you're
bringing yourself down you're beating
yourself out like people will cheer for
you and me they won't cheer for
themselves
i'm the same way
and so this uber driver
the story that you're talking about i
get into the car
and
we start driving and i'm on the phone as
we're driving and i'm having a
conversation with somebody about this
daytime talk show that i launched which
was a dream with sony pictures
television and then uh was promptly
fired after season one it was a huge
[__] failure because we didn't make
it to season two
huge failure in real world terms massive
success when it comes to the timeline of
my life
and so i'm talking to this person about
the talk show i hang up the phone and
this uber driver comes alive he's like
oh my gosh i can't believe you're in my
cab
and i'm like why and he says because i i
want to talk to you about something i
think you can help me and i'm like great
how can i help you and he says i have a
dream of being a oscar-winning uh actor
and creating opportunities for other
black and latino men to do the same in
acting and i'm like freaking fantastic
what the [__] are you doing in dallas
right yeah the guy's 25
and so
i i go you know the game is in new york
and la i mean sure you can act you can
write stuff you can be here in dallas
but why are you not in la why are you
not in new york and he's like you're
right you're right you're right i need
to move to la like why not
and he says i have seven hundred dollars
in my bank account and i'm like that's
freaking fantastic you have seven
hundred dollars in a car
dude drop me off and get driving what
are you waiting for and so we have this
whole conversation and i write about it
in this book where
i am actively arguing for his dream and
he is actively arguing against his dream
and
what is so sad
is throughout this conversation tom he's
like you're right 700 could get me there
you're right i am only 25. you're right
if i keep thinking and thinking and
thinking and thinking about what i want
to be doing i'm not only going to drive
in circles my whole life is going to
spin in circles as i think about what i
want and i don't do [__] about it
and then you are going to find yourself
not at 25 but at 45 or 65 and you're
going to be so filled with regret that
you never [__] put a put a bet on
yourself
and so
this conversation ends with him
declaring that he's going to go to
california and me giving him a bunch of
tools that i talk about in this book
and the point of the story is does he
move or not i don't [__] know
the point of the story is it's so easy
to see what somebody else should do it's
so easy to cheer for somebody else we
all do that right we cheer for our
favorite sports teams we follow our
favorite influencers and authors we plan
birthday parties for our friends we take
on extra work from our colleagues we
support everyone around us
we do not know how to do it for
ourselves
yeah it's it's really an interesting
trick of the mind and
like you i have this similar
sense of i want to be able to want it
for people yeah and the one thing in my
life that i am very grateful for is that
i know how to build desire i know how to
go down the process of wanting something
what what is that process for you of
desire because most what i've found in
this book
is here's the thing for most people and
i'm hoping that your process will attack
this what i've discovered that is
heartbreaking
is the average person
cannot celebrate themselves cannot i'm
going to ask everybody who's watching
this to tomorrow morning stand in front
of the mirror we're going to unpack this
whole thing and try to high-five
yourself
and most really fast give people the the
science behind why that's meaningful so
i have this habit of every single
morning i stand in front of the mirror
and i take a moment and i raise my hand
and i give my reflection a high five and
there's so much science behind this so
instead of seeing yourself right and
have having this moment in the mirror
you know what the average person does
first of all we beat ourselves down so i
would look in the mirror for 40 some
years and be like oh my god my freaking
jowls look like saddle bags on a goddamn
horse going in the grand canyon my eyes
have my neck is only striped my boob one
boob's hanging lower than the other i
look like [__] my gray hair like i start
bringing myself down
and when you start going down that road
with your reflection
then your thoughts go to i didn't get to
that email i forgot to text lisa back i
oh my gosh the dog still needs to be
walking i've got nine minutes for my
first zoom you're now
checking out
and that moment in the mirror every
morning
could be a profound moment
where you lift yourself up
and you check back in with your
intention
so the first piece of research and this
is recent from harvard business school
is that a simple moment
in the morning
where you set an intention
about who you're going to be today
impacts productivity
how you show up as a leader
it impacts your confidence it impacts
your mood all day long just that simple
moment of setting an intention so that's
research number one instead of
standing in front of the sink in your
bathroom and criticizing your appearance
or mindlessly going on autopilot
check back in and let's teach you to
make it a habit to lift yourself back up
second piece of research and this comes
from a whole field of study called
neurobics neurobics is like aerobics for
your mind i didn't make this up
this is
literally you can speed up the
development of new neural pathways by
marrying physical activity
with a change in thought
and so traditionally i know you've
covered this on your show if you for
example were to brush your teeth i'm a
right-hander if you were to brush it
with your other hand
and think
uh a new thought
the fact that your brain is focusing on
brushing with your non-dominant hand
activates more focus on the new thought
it accelerates the learning so you take
neurobics a physical activity with a
different thought and let me let's talk
about a high five for example
what does a high five mean to you
that somebody did something awesome or i
did something awesome correct and if you
think about the times in your life when
you've gotten a high five it's because
somebody's like tom you're amazing tom
get your attitude out of the can you got
this tom you're gonna make this shot tom
we can still win i believe in you keep
going
you have a lifetime positive association
with giving other people high fives
stored right here in your subconscious
mind when you raise your hand to your
own reflection it is impossible
for you to think god i look fat
why am i an [__] i really screwed up
my life you can't do it because your
lifetime association with this motion is
all i believe in you i got you i see you
i celebrate you and so you in the moment
of doing it override decades of negative
self-talk it's incredible
now have you ever gotten a high five
where somebody misses the hand or it's
sort of like it sucks right
yeah what do you do when that happens i
redo it correct
that's because a high five requires you
to be present and there is an intention
behind it
so you can't raise your hand to your own
reflection without now grounding
yourself in the moment that's just the
beginning of the research i can go on
about the nba
that was my favorite part hearing about
the nba like even now it's giving me
chills like and especially because we're
recording this still as everybody
thought we were getting out of the
pandemic and now we've got the the
variant
now even i'm starting to worry about the
lack of physical contact and just like
this the the cues that we give each
other through touch like that so yeah
this was one of my favorite parts of the
book yeah i love this research too
because you know what happened with the
high five is look i did this on a low
moment for myself
like so my brand of self-help is mel's
life is kind of [__] up at the moment
and she can't figure out how to help
herself so she stumbles by accident on
something really stupid on its face
and it feels good
and then i share it with my audience and
if they pick up on it and they then i'm
like okay we're on to something so for
me the high five tom began i'm fired
from my talk show my book contract is
cancelled every speech has been canceled
my kids are now home so we've got three
kids 22 20
age 15 all in varying states of distress
i am triggered because my origin story
as you know from being on the show and
us being friends the five second rule
was 12 years ago losing everything and
so i'm now having this feeling like i'm
about to lose everything and i'm also
feeling like i'm losing grip on reality
as the pandemic is hitting and as my
kids are in distress and i don't know
what to do just like everybody on the
planet i find myself in my bathroom one
morning in my underwear
and i am having
this spiral of negative thoughts i look
like [__]
i don't know how to fix this
i wish somebody would solve this for me
i feel overwhelmed i feel scared about
my parents health i feel scared about
everybody on the front lines
and even though i'm literally like you
somebody that empowers other people i
didn't know what the [__] to say to
myself
and as pathetic as it sounds i found
myself just raising my hand
just in a way to basically be like
shut up mel come on girl like put your
shoulders back lift your you you got
this
you can do this
and something shifted and i went on with
my day and then the next morning i walk
into my bathroom and this is the other
weird thing about the high five i've
literally either criticized myself or
ignored myself in the mirror
for decades
when you start to have a moment with
yourself
the crazy part is you start to build a
partnership with yourself that's
interesting
like
you know when you are pulling out of
your driveway or you're walking down the
street you see a neighbor and they greet
you
you will start to have that experience
when you create this intentional moment
with yourself in the mirror every
morning
and so
as i started to do this
i thought this is actually
making me feel like the wind is at my
back when i leave the bathroom it's
making me feel just like when you leave
a huddle in sports and you high five or
you're a runner running a race or doing
some big endurance challenge and some
spectator high-fives you or another
racers like come on you got this as
you're dragging down low
it
gives you a little energy
like i think too about this high five a
lot like i know you know you're friends
with david goggins i'm a huge fan of
goggins and so and i know there's a lot
of people that watch this show
especially men that are like this sounds
kind of stupid
this is the equivalent of goggins cookie
jar moment
so we all think like we've all been
raised like tough love hard on myself
this woo
[__] the research is clear on this
being hard on yourself is not [__]
motivating it's demotivating
and if you already feel like a failure
or you feel a sense of shame or you're
overwhelmed beating yourself up for
where you are does not [__] work
it drives you into the gutter
the most motivating force in the world
on the planet based on research hands
down
is empowerment encouragement support and
celebration and for our entire lives we
have outsourced that to somebody else
the research is very clear so the nba
study they did this big study looking at
nba teams and they could predict in the
study who was going to be in the
championship rounds
based on in the preseason what teams had
the most high fives fist bumps and back
paths why
because those kind of gestures create
partnership and trust and i'm here to
tell you when you start doing it in the
mirror you're creating partnership and
trust with yourself
and so you know one of the things that i
love about this
is that
in a moment when you feel alone
you can give yourself the boost the
support the empowerment that you need
to keep going
and here's another piece of research
that's also like holy cow
you're a big proponent of the growth
mindset you guys talk about it all the
time on this show right so researchers
wanted to know what is the most
empowering way to motivate kids through
a really big challenge okay they divide
the kids into three groups this takes
the marshmallow test to a whole another
level you got one group of kids that are
doing a challenging task and they're
getting the fixed mindset praise which
we all know does not work oh tom you're
so smart oh tom i love your glasses
that's going to help you oh tom you got
a great smile oh tom you know i i just
love so much about you i know you can do
this so that's one group the second
group gets the growth mindset kind of
phrase tom you are such a hard worker
tom your perseverance is unbelievable
tom you just keep going
that does better obviously than telling
you that you're smart because it makes
you motivated to work hard the third
group
they just got a simple high five the
researchers didn't even say anything to
the kids they just walked up gave them a
high five the group of kids that got a
simple high five outperformed outworked
through all of the challenges all of the
other forms of praise why
because a high five is something deeper
than praise
it fulfills your most fundamental needs
as a human being
when somebody high-fives you you feel
seen
you feel heard
and you feel like somebody has
acknowledged
you for the unique person that you are
let's just talk for a second about the
things that go viral
you can always find going viral
a teacher standing outside of a
classroom doing what
greeting kids with individual handshakes
and we see that we're like oh that's
amazing why because every one of those
kids before they walk into the classroom
feels seen
they feel heard and they feel
acknowledged for the unique individual
that they are
all through a simple handshake or high
five and one of the reasons why i'm so
excited about this is because in
starting to just kind of put it out
there very casually uh on the story you
know in the very beginning because i've
been researching this now for a year
um
i started to get back all of the
objections that people had to doing it
and they're [__] sad tom
and this gets to the heart of why i
think so many people are stuck
one of the biggest objections that
people had to
standing in front of the mirror take a
moment look at yourself and then raise
your hand
as people said over and over and over
again
i haven't done anything
worthy
of high-fiving
high-fiving feels like a celebration
i don't have the number on the scale
that i want
i don't like my bank account i don't
enjoy what i do for a living i've made a
shitload of mistakes i'm struggling with
trauma
i don't have anything to celebrate
and what i realized is
people are making a fundamental mistake
you are withholding the very support
empowerment and celebration that you
need to change
and to do the hard work and to face the
things that you're scared of
and that's why
you're not changing this is so
interesting so i'm going to push you on
this i'm super curious because one of
the things i love about you is you're so
blunt and honest about hey if you want
to have self-worth you have to do things
you think you're worthy i'm a huge
proponent of that and yet i do recognize
that you have to let yourself off the
hook to really get started so how do you
help people anchor on something is it
just hey it's the [__] neurochemistry
of the situation you have to do it yeah
pretty much
because if you can't stand in front of
the mirror
and raise your hand
and high-five yourself just because you
got your ass out of bed
and you're breathing
you will never get what you want in life
ever
there is something in the resistance to
it and if you unpack the resistance you
will find the reason why you don't have
what you want
you either think you're not worthy of it
or you think that it's kind of stupid or
you have been brought up to believe that
for women in particular you're going to
be [__] or selfish or not likable if
you're celebrating yourself there is
something in the resistance to you
simply
cheering for yourself so talk to the
person though that so as of right now
they they really believe the world has
shown them that they aren't worthy it's
not like they question it they know it
to be true yeah how do you help people
because i recognize that as a lie or
even if it's true it's useless
but how do you help people
out of that moment so
the first thing that i would say is how
is
treating yourself as if you're unworthy
helping you
like let's just get strategic and common
sense about it
is the negative [__] you're saying
and the support that you're withholding
helping you feel better
if it's not
try this
try celebrating yourself five days in a
row literally try starting your day by
waking up and raising your hand and
high-fiving yourself in the mirror just
because you're breathing
and see what happens uh we have a a
woman that wrote to us who's in a
domestic violence shelter
she's lost everything she's been in
abusive relationships she has a
tremendous amount of childhood trauma
she is doing the high five habit and
here's what she had to say about it
i have nothing right now i have a
tremendous amount of evidence from my
life that i have [__] everything up
but you know what this high five habit
is showing me
i still have me
i can have my own back
i can be here for myself
the world has told me and convinced me
that i can't but every morning when i
stand here and i stare at myself in the
mirror and i raise my hand in defiance
of all the [__] that's happened to me
i keep going
i am saying i believe in myself and when
you have that small reversal that small
act of defiance and that's what it is if
you're like heavy and you're eating
emotionally or you're feeding your
trauma when you raise your hand and
celebrate yourself even though
you don't like what you look like
it's an act of [__] defiance to all
the stuff that you have survived in your
life and the best part about it you
don't have to [__] say anything
and you know the reason why this is so
important is most mantras are complete
[__]
because you don't believe it
you know it's a there's a we all know we
need to accept ourselves we all know we
need to love ourselves but how how do
you do it to your point when you have a
bunch of evidence stacked up that you've
failed or reasons that you see that make
you feel like you've blown it or you're
not worthy of it i'll tell you how you
freaking raise your hand and high-five
yourself anyway because beating yourself
up will not make you do the work to get
healthy
and tearing yourself down over the [__]
that you've done or the terrible
relationships that you're in it's not
going to empower you to change the
patterns that are keeping you stuck
but raising your hand in an act of
defiance or a [__] you to the past that
you survived and saying i'm still here
which means i still have a shot to
change my life
that is what this means
there's another thing that you talk
about in the book that i think ties to
this really well which is the reticular
activating system the ras
and you have this thing uh which you say
you look for the hearts yes and it's
really an interesting psychological
principle of you're going to see what
you look for yes and whether that's a
red mazda or whatever you say in the
book or whether that's a heart when
you're walking around whether that's a
reason to
love your wife whatever
if you look for it you're going to find
it and if it's a problem and a reason
that you're you know a dirt bag and a
reason that you're not worthy and all of
that you're going to see them and they
will be there for you and they will
overwhelm you
what is this idea of looking for hearts
what is that how do people use it okay
so i love this tool because obviously
the high five in the mirror it's like a
trojan horse it's the beginning of
building this partnership with yourself
and throughout the book
i then unpack all these other little
tools and habits that you can use that
are in this lane of empowerment support
belief in self the book and i want to
take a second to point this out the book
is rich
with a bunch of other ideas so anybody
that's tempted to say okay well i've
already heard the
high five myself and i'm done you did a
really good job of the and to be honest
i'm not even sure i guess because it was
what unlock things for you in your life
but there's like 15 things that you
could have titled the book after yeah um
so anyway back to this so the reticular
activity system the ras for short um for
if you don't know what it is picture a
hair net over your brain that is a live
network and the ras is a filter and it
has a huge job and it is a filter that
blocks out 99
of the world and lets in about you know
point zero zero zero zero zero zero zero
zero one percent
and it is always changing
there are only four things tom that get
through the hair net on your head
the sound of your name and you've
experienced this because you've been
walking through a crowd you're like did
somebody say my name
right this cocktail party effects
cocktail party effect the second thing
that gets through is any sort of threat
so if you hear a loud noise and you go
like this there are lots of noises you
didn't hear but the loud one you kind of
duck because it's a threat the third
thing is when your partner is interested
in sex with either you or someone else
that's why you're like why are you
checking that person out right you know
because the brain is letting that
information in
the fourth thing and this is where the
transformation
begins
your brain will let in anything that it
believes is important to you the
zygarnic effect is
the documented fact that when something
is important to you
and i'll explain what that means
your brain opens up a checklist in your
mind
and now your brain wants it puts
this item on your checklist it will
store the checklist in your subconscious
it's encoded in your ras and your mind
is now on the alert
to spot things related to it
the way that you make yourself feel like
something is important is your nervous
system goes on alert while you're
thinking about it you're either super
excited about something oh this is super
important or this is the trauma effect
you go on alert and you have something
really bad happen which is why
things continue to bring it up
throughout the rest of your life so when
you understand that if something's
important to you
your filter will change in real time how
you see the [__] world
you now know how to change your brain to
work for you and looking for hearts is
the way i'm going to prove to you that
this happens i want to give you one
other example because everybody's
experienced this if you've ever gone
shopping for a new car or you've dreamt
about having a new car
what happens immediately when you get
excited about that new car is your mind
goes zygon artifact oops okay tom wants
the new bronco that's cool so what do
you see now you see broncos everywhere
now they were always there but your mind
is letting them in
because the zygon artifact
is now made it on a checklist it's
changed the ras
and so i am going to prove to you
that it is
unbelievably cool that you can change
the way that you view the world by
looking for heart-shaped objects
so tomorrow when you wake up you're
going to start your day by high-fiving
yourself in the mirror i want you to
examine what the resistance about
because you're going to start to then on
be able to unpacked what's holding you
back
then you're going to go out in the world
and just like tell your mind i want to
see a heart today look for a rock look
for a leaf look in your like latte is
there a little shape there is there an
oil stain on the floor and when you see
one stop
and go [__]
i i just
like there's a scavenger hunt
i never would have seen that before
thank you brain
now your brain's like
more hearts you will start to see hearts
everywhere and when you can start to
train your brain and realize whoa
this is
actually a cool thing this is
high-fiving your mind
when you can see hearts you can now go
wait a minute
if i can change what i see based on what
i tell it
maybe if i got serious about not
constantly saying i'm a failure i
wouldn't attach that or see it
everywhere
maybe if i got serious about saying
i can figure anything out
this is happening for a reason instead
of i'm [__] you say okay i'm gonna
learn something with this
it changes the way your brain filters
everything
and this is such an important piece to
the book because we've all had the
experience where you love somebody
deeply
and you see all their incredible
attributes
and all they see is failure or all they
see is the weight that they can't lose
and it doesn't matter what you say it
doesn't matter what kind of pep talk or
support you give them
your loved one still only sees what they
hate about themselves
blame the filter in your brain you have
been bitching about your appearance or
the weight on your scale the fact that
you're a failure for so long your brain
believes it's important to you to see
reasons why this is true
and one of the things i got to say about
this
and everything in the book is the tools
are simple tom
but it's super important to say
just because you change and start
celebrating yourself it's not going to
make the weight disappear suddenly
it doesn't change the number on the
scale overnight
what it changes is you
and that changes your ability
to deal with the problems and the issues
you want to change in your life i have
some really
counter-intuitive ideas
bold stances on things which i found
incredibly interesting one of them is
jealousy
and that not to just reject that stuff
offhand but that there's actually
information carried in those strong
emotions jealousy is one of the most
powerful directional signals on the
planet
because you're only jealous of people
that are doing things or have things
that you actually want it's impossible
to be fake jealous
whatever you're jealous of is hitting
something deeply personal [__] pay
attention to it instead of stewing in it
go oh
flip it
that's interesting
i wonder why i'm jealous what is it
about it oh
it's that they're doing it consistently
it's that they've built a team it's that
they've aligned their work together so
that they're spending more time together
how could i take those things that i'm
really now really inspired by
and take action and go get them in my
life
because the thing about jealousy is it's
just your inspiration that's blocked
jealousy
is sort of the insecurity
that you have that blocks this
inspiration i guarantee you back to the
uber driver he's jealous of all the
other actors earning oscars
because he's so inspired by the thought
of doing that in his own life but his
insecurity is blocking action his fear
is blocking action so instead of it
being inspiration
it shows up as jealousy and i'm here to
tell you the second you feel jealousy
freaking whoop stop okay let's unpack
that what exactly is it about it and now
if i were inspired by it because there's
enough success to go around for
everybody
if i can use that as a road map to then
go figure out how i might be able to do
that for myself
wow
talk about a game changer and now let's
add in the high five what if every time
i took a little step i celebrated myself
for just doing it now you're building
small wins and momentum in a direction
that's meant for you that's how you
change your life
yeah that to me getting people to
understand that
the idea that there's enough success for
anybody it doesn't matter if you're
copying somebody for
no reason other than the only thing that
matters in life is are you having fun is
this a joyful life are you
working hard at something that matters
to you yeah and
whether or not
it's even a carbon copy of somebody else
if you're having a ball you've already
won totally and getting people to
recognize like and this is why i like
your answer around at some point you
just have to accept you're high-fiving
yourself in the mirror because the
neurochemistry says that that's what you
need to do
getting people to understand
neurochemistry is the game and once you
understand the game that you're playing
then you can play it well but if you
don't understand the game then you're
going to get stuck and you're going to
be stuck forever
and you talk a lot about taking
responsibility for that recognizing
nobody's coming to save you something
you said in the book it's something that
you've said in interviews it's something
that i absolutely think is really
powerful
how do we use that why is that important
to recognize
well it's important to recognize because
first of all nobody is coming
[Laughter]
i mean if you've been sitting around
waiting for somebody to discover you to
pick you to save you to rescue you to
give you your shot it's not [__]
happening
like at some point you got to wake up
and realize when you're 18 and you're
out of that house
you have to parent yourself
your life is your responsibility and as
a woman one of the things that i found
to be
extraordinarily transformational is when
i stopped in a very traditional sense
looking to my partner to be responsible
for providing
for me
providing financially providing the
support providing when i realized
wait a minute it starts with me
i have to be
able to figure out how to make myself
happy that's by the way the secret to a
happy relationship marry somebody who's
happy and work on your own happiness
preach
and so when you stop outsourcing
your happiness your validation your
support
all of it and you bring it back in
and you get responsible for it it sounds
scary it's so
liberating because you could do anything
when you're responsible when you're the
driver of your life when you're not
looking out to anybody else to fix it
for you can you ask for help of course
but the buck stops with you
you're the one that has to do the work
you're the one who has to push your own
ass you're the one who has to figure out
what makes you happy you're the one who
has to figure out and become self-aware
about what you need and then you're the
one that has to
find whatever it is the courage or being
humble enough to ask for help
even if it's asking for help
from the biggest ally that you have
which is the person staring back at you
in the mirror every damn morning
yeah i don't know why people aren't more
obsessed with their goals it's like
if my goals demand that i ask for help
then i'm going to ask for help like i'm
not even going to let anything else get
in the way i'm just so obsessed with if
my goal is exciting and honorable
then i should actually want to achieve
it and therefore whatever it is that i
need to do so tom this is why and this
comes back to what makes has made me
really sad and
deeply moved by the kinds of things that
people are sharing
most people aren't obsessed with their
goals because they don't believe they're
worthy of them
it's easy to dream about what you want
but in between where you are and what
you want
there's a tremendous amount of stuff you
got to change and do
and if you have
a lot of trauma in your background or
you were raised by somebody who beat the
[__] out of you or told you were a piece
of [__] or if you've had to deal with
microaggressions or racist
discriminatory systematic crap your
entire life
you have been given the message over and
over and over even though it's not true
that you don't deserve it that there's
something wrong with you
and if you don't
at some point
be defiant against what the world or
your caregivers or your past experience
has pounded into your brain incorrectly
unfairly
you will forever be stuck with that
story
you are not responsible for what
happened to you
you survived what happened to you
but you do have a responsibility to heal
yourself and to do the work to change so
that you can be the happy fulfilled
person that you were born to be
yeah that's really powerful because it's
the only thing that works and
you know thinking about
so many people have just immense things
that have happened that have been unfair
and as you said they didn't do anything
to deserve it but now what
now you're there you've got the trauma
and no one can heal it for you it's
there's a name for it i think it's
called the pedestrian problem it's like
imagine that you get hit by a car and
the driver was drunk and
let's say that the driver was bill gates
and let's say that
you win a settlement
but if
the damage that happened to your body
can't be fixed
with all the money in the world and you
just have to do physical therapy then
it's like even though it is unfair that
you have to do the physical therapy you
there is no amount of money that you can
throw at it that will stop you from
having to suffer to build yourself back
up and i think a lot of people either
fall prey to trap number one which is
they don't think they're worthy or they
fall prey to trap number two which is
it's so unfair they just don't take
action right but they're nonetheless in
the situation that they're in and if the
whole punch line to life is
neurochemistry and feeling joyful and
you know being um excited about who you
are when you're by yourself then it's
like well you have to do the work even
if it isn't fair and that time
especially if it isn't
because there's two
kinds of prisons that you can sentence
yourself to or be sentenced to right one
is all the physical [__] you're talking
about the circumstances of your life
the circumstances of your body the
circumstances that are unfair
and then there is the mental prison and
that's the one you're in control of
so people can do all kinds of [__] to
you
and you can be born into situations that
are not uh
fair they're not safe they're cruel
it's unfair you didn't deserve it
but the real power that you always have
is
how you react to it mentally i'm not
saying put lipstick on a pig and ignore
the very real problems you're saying
you're you're facing
i'm saying
it begins with your mental attitude
about your own ability to face it
and to
survive it and to move past it
that's what i'm saying
because without that like let's go back
to the woman in the domestic violence
shelter who's had the [__] beaten out of
her by partners who has immense
emotional trauma stored in her nervous
system stored in the neurochemistry of
her brain she has a extraordinary amount
of hurdles to get through in her life to
heal to be safe to break patterns that
are associated with the trauma that
she's experienced as a child the trauma
that she experienced in romantic
relationships the physical abuse she has
issues related to poverty
can a human being
survive those things and change of
course they can
it begins though
with the belief that you can
and so when i come back to this moment
every single morning
you can have nothing
and you can still have your own back
you can have tremendous
problems and very real obstacles that
you're facing
and you can have a mindset that says
through my efforts
my attitude i can have an impact
on the situation that i'm in
that's the power that i have
i can ask for help because i believe i
deserve it
i can seek therapy because i believe
i should heal because i deserve that
i can seek information from shows like
impact theory about how to break trauma
patterns about how to regulate my
nervous system because i believe
i am worthy of that when i raise my hand
in the mirror i'm basically saying
[__] off to these people that hurt me
because i believe that i deserve better
that's where it begins begins with you
self-confidence self-love
self-esteem
self-reliance
self-awareness it all has the same self
you have to
give yourself
those things you want validation give it
to yourself you want to be cheered for
give it to yourself you want to feel
supported in life
start by giving those things to yourself
because
the most important relationship that you
have
is the one you have with yourself and
you work on it the least
it's the foundation of every
relationship you have
and
so i believe that there are simple
things you can do from looking at hearts
which doesn't solve your problems it
proves to you that it's possible to
change the way your brain works
that's why i want you to do it it's not
going to take away poverty it's not
going to make you lose a hundred pounds
it's going to prove to you that [__] you
do
have power
over the way your mind works
and when you get crafty about training
your brain you can do really cool [__]
and when your attitude is optimistic
based on research we know that you will
work harder and keep going because you
believe that it makes a difference
it begins with these simple things
speaking of tricks that you can do to
get control of your mind in the book you
talk about what i'll call a pattern
interrupt
forget the exact phrase you use for it
but you talk a lot about i'm not going
to think about that i'm not thinking
about that
what does that mean how do you do it why
is it useful
so it's very it's what i started doing
before the five second rule five four
three two one because you can count
backwards do the same thing
but
a lot of times it's the pattern of
negative thoughts i'm fat i'm this i'm
that i'm the other thing i'm not good
enough i'm not smart enough or even just
worrying what if the delta variant takes
off what if i don't go back to work what
if this happens what if that how is that
helping you exactly like there's
productive worry which is worry that
motivates you to take action and then
there's destructive worry which is worry
that makes you literally circle the
drain mentally
you always want to interrupt destructive
worry or any kind of destructive
self-talk so the second you catch
yourself going gosh i look fat or boy
i'm a loser there i go i failed again
you're like literally
slap that [__] away like high-five it
away i'm not thinking about that
i'm not thinking about that
i'm not thinking about that and you
start with i'm not thinking about that
because if you're so used to hearing i'm
not good enough there's no [__] way
you're going to believe the mantra i'm
good enough
because the thing about mantras are and
this is why most mantras are [__] is
they don't work unless you believe them
and so there is power in creating what's
called a meaningful mantra
but the first step to getting control of
the negative self-talk is interrupt that
[__] don't listen to it i'm not thinking
about that i'm not thinking about that
and then what i want you to do so do
that for a day i'm not thinking about
that i'm not thinking about that if you
have any kind of thought that makes you
feel bad that you don't like i'm not
thinking about that
the next day start to notice
what are the patterns in terms of the
thoughts that come up
you know when i was writing this book
one of my daughters talked about the
fact that she's constantly feeling like
she's not a good person
and so for example she missed a dentist
appointment
and because she's constantly thinking
i'm not a good person
missing the dentist appointment becomes
evidence see there i am again i miss the
dentist appointment i'm not a good
person
no
are you kidding
like if somebody doesn't have the story
if somebody has a different story like
i'm a i'm a pretty good person i do my
best and you miss the dentist
appointment a lot of us are like oh
thank god i can't stand the tennis you
know i'll pay the i'll pay the 20 fee i
don't have to go you don't attach i'm a
shitty person to it
and so
she started using i'm not thinking about
that
she's not ready to believe she's a good
person yet
because she's so used to saying i'm not
a good person
so the first step is interrupt the thing
then take notice
and then you can start to create what i
call a meaningful mantra because now we
want to break the pattern by saying i'm
not thinking about that or use the five
second rule five four three two one and
then when you're ready you can create a
meaningful mantra to replace it because
any pattern
is going to repeat unless you replace it
and so meaningful mantras are things
that you can be like yeah i can believe
that so it might be
ah i'm not perfect but i'm trying ah i'm
not perfect but i'm doing my best
ah you know i screw up sometimes
uh but i'm not a bad person you know
like those kind of things that are sort
of not like yeah superhero
mantra i'm fabulous like most of us
don't really feel that way about
ourselves
so if you just are like i'm doing the
best i can
that's pretty empowering
if you think about it
or i can i can learn i can learn from
this
or this is temporary i'll be okay
those sorts of things are little ways to
high-five your mind instead of again
going low you got a choice do you take
yourself down
or do you lift yourself up
are you going outside of yourself or are
you coming back in for what you need
i want you to come in
and lift yourself up that's what the
high five habit's about
interrupt yourself tell yourself an
empowering story that brings us to the
second thing that i mentioned at the
beginning that in the book it actually
almost made me cry i was like whoa i was
surprised by how much it hit me but i
think you and i tell very different
stories about the same story
and that was the thing that i found so
interesting about the painting oh
walk people through that moment i think
it's worth telling the story
uh and then we can talk about how you
see it and how i see it and
i i think the
the fact that we look at this
differently may be the whole punch line
well the fact that you almost cried um
and a robot was reading it to you as you
were having the transcript of my new
book uh read to you by a robot is
amazing wait to hear me read it because
in the audiobook i
sob through this story really i'm not
surprised like given that it hit me in
the robot voice as usual oh my gosh
okay so this is one of these moments
that's like a combination of science and
the the zygon arc effect and the res and
wanting something
so when i was a senior in college at
dartmouth it was 1989
my parents came to see me and we went to
this mill in vermont and i walked into
this famous mill called simon pierce and
there in the restaurant on the wall with
his was this massive painting tom and it
was the size of a door
and i saw it and i immediately was drawn
to it
and this is another thing about this
book i believe that what's meant for you
is trying to reach you
that you are
neurochemistry dna energetically aligned
with some things and purposes and
passions that just call to you and for
whatever reason in 1989 as a you know 21
year old person i am now finding myself
i'm not in the restaurant i am literally
standing in the painting i can hear the
geese the the grass is blowing in the
wind i'm in the field that is depicted
and then all of a sudden i come back to
i'm back in the restaurant i'm like i am
going to own this
painting second heart effect right there
this is important to me i have a full
body sensation i lean forward oh my god
it's three thousand dollars
not today not today
that's it i go back i have dinner
but here's the thing once something's
important to you
it never
leaves your mind
if you always dreamt about being a
singer-songwriter and you never did it
you will be haunted by that
at the age of 70 because it's still
right here stored in the back of your
mind it's something that's meant for you
that's trying to call to you you see
your dreams you either pursue them or
they [__] haunt you
so this painting like imprinted itself
on me
and for years
i would think about it anytime somebody
would say the word vermont or there was
like hand blown glass that was kind of
heavy at a bar i'd think about this
painting
now my life goes on cup of like almost a
decade passes i get married to my
husband christopher and we're going up
to vermont
and uh we go to the mill because i want
to see if the painting's still there and
we go all around the mill and the artist
is still there gail shepard but my
painting's gone and here's the
interesting thing chris was more
disappointed than i was
because i was so sure
that at some point i would have enough
money to track down the person that
bought it
that i would at some point whether it
was 70 years six years that some point i
would own it now it's interesting
because there were other areas of my
life where i did not have this assurance
but there was something about this
painting i kept an open mind
i believed it was possible even when i
wasn't doing anything about it so a
couple more years pass i turned 30 and
my husband asks everybody to just chip
some money into an envelope and he hands
me an envelope full of 500 i immediately
think about the painting now keep in
mind 500 is gonna buy [__] by this
artist at this point i'm pregnant i
should probably buy a crib or stools for
our new house but i pick up the phone
and i call the mill and i'm like i would
like to buy a piece by gail shepard and
i tell him my budget the guy kind of
clears his throat and is like well i can
send you polaroids of the small pieces
and i'm embarrassed and
i say by the way there is this one piece
and i describe this painting as best as
i can remember it in full detail and the
guy goes
well
that was before my time but i bet gail
will remember and i'm like gail you know
gail he's like of course i know gail she
lives down the street here's her number
so i eventually call gail
and
we have this amazing conversation
and i say by the way
there was this one painting
almost 10 years ago
big vermont landscape a stand of poplars
down the center grass blowing on either
side and i could hear her thinking and
she said you know mel over the years
i've done so many large format paintings
i'd hate
to
guess which one it wasn't be wrong
how about this why don't we meet at the
mill
we'll walk all around i'll tell you the
stories behind the paintings and then if
you don't like anything there i'll take
you back to my studio and you can look
at what i'm working on if you don't like
anything there then you can look through
my slides and maybe just maybe you'll be
able to find this painting that you saw
over a decade ago so i am like on fire
now we go to the mill we meet her and
her husband she's a phenomenal we're
walking around and tom as we're walking
around and people are coming up here i'm
realizing
i'm [__]
like i can't afford any of these
paintings i am with somebody
that i
admire
like it'd be like meeting your favorite
basketball player and knowing you can't
afford a ticket to the game
and we sit down
and she says
now that we're sitting down
i have something to tell you
and she says
there has only been two times in my
entire life
that i have done two studies of the same
scene at the same time
your painting is one of them
it's a pair
and the sister piece to the painting
that you saw all those years ago
is sitting in my studio
where it has been
waiting for the last 11 years for you to
come looking for it
and so we drove down the road and um
we walked into her studio and there on
this big easel was the sister piece to
my painting and you know there i
immediately
could see slight differences like the
grass had slightly less movement in it
and like a few less trees going down the
center it was the most exquisite moment
of my life
it was like
time
collapsed and i was
standing in that mill in 1989.
saying
this would be mine with every fiber of
my being believing it was true
and 11 years later standing before it
and then of course i'm like oh my god i
can't [__] afford this
and so i say to chris you know i just
promise me you'll buy me this someday
and so he turns to gallon says hey gail
how much for the big one and she said
well mel can have it for 500 because
clearly
when i was making it
i was making it for her
and it now
hangs in my kitchen
and it is a and it's on the the author
photo of the book
and it is a reminder
that your mind
is designed to help you get what you
want
you just have to be willing to believe
it's possible
yeah that that story really really hit
me and
the reason it hit me i mean partly
kismet it's just like wow like what are
the odds that's so crazy and then the
other part is that
you get to tell a story about what that
means right so whether it's
you know the einstein
quote about how the most important
decision any human has to make is
whether you live in a friendly or a
hostile universe and i've always loved
that he said it's a decision
or whether you say you know this is the
universe looking out for me or whether
you say your brain is going to guide you
to the things you want or you know for
me it's just that you get to stamp that
with meaning and i find that
part of the human mind so powerful that
it really doesn't matter what happens to
us what matters what makes that an
emotional story is that you get to
stamp it with meaning yeah and
i i don't know who first said that we're
meaning making machines but it's like
so spot on
and yeah it was just so incredible
hearing as you just walked us through i
mean you do it just like you did in the
book
and uh
that we can assign so much profundity to
something like that i think is exquisite
and you know to tie it up with a bow
you know the whole thesis of your book
is that there are these very
simple things that you can do to unlock
your mind and then to begin to guide
your mind to guide it away from the
things that have caused you trouble
towards the things that are going to
empower you such that you will take the
action
that you need to take in order to get
the life that you actually want exactly
mel
another incredible journey i mean really
really i was impressed by the book i
think it is extraordinary i think it is
well worth people's time i think it is
chock full of things that people can use
where can they
connect with you is the book wherever
one would normally you can buy it i'm
super excited like it's literally
releasing in 18 languages
and um go yeah right then and
you can get it around the world and the
other thing that i love about it yeah i
would love for you to buy the book i'd
love for you to listen to the audiobook
because it's very different experience
than reading the book you should
absolutely read the book but also the
audiobook is i am talking straight to
you with a level of intention that is
going to just scream through that
microphone
and you can connect with me online
my website mel robbins is where you find
me but what i also love about everything
that we're talking about is it's free
and you can use it with your kids
you can teach it to the senior citizens
in your life you don't have to have even
graduated from high school
this is tools that you can put to use
immediately grounded in science that
absolutely work and it's the beginning
of a whole new relationship that you're
going to have with yourself
and that's going to change everything
i love it i love you i'll be right back
boys and girls the book is phenomenal
you won't regret it trust me and as an
audible junkie myself i can't encourage
you guys enough to give that a listen
knowing that we'll be hearing it
directly in her voice and speaking of
other things that will be amazing if you
haven't already be sure to subscribe and
until next time my friends be legendary
take care peace